I'm Frank Blair speaking for the editors of Life magazine. At the invitation of the Gulf
Oil Company, the life editors for the next three months in their lively and formative
and provocative way are covering the important events of the 1952 presidential campaigns for
We the People. Tonight it's the battle for the South or the bigger battle within the Democratic
Party. We'll take you direct to Senator Esther's key fovers, headquarters in the Raleigh Hotel
in Washington. You'll meet Senator key fover and those who are working hard to put him in the White
House. One of his most important helpers of course is Mrs. Nancy key fover. She'll be there with her
husband. And for the first time on a television network you will see an exclusive film made by the
march of time of an historic debate between Senator key fover and Senator Richard Russell of Georgia.
We'll bring you the battle for the South in just a moment. Right now Bill Rogers has a word for you.
Hi there. You know the heat of an election year shows that Americans think pretty hard before
casting their votes. They seriously consider a candidate from every possible angle. What does he
stand for? What about his record of past performance and will he wear well over the long haul?
Yes those are all good questions and questions that demand proof too. And when Mr. American gets
his proof then he'll make up his mind, make up his choice and stay with it. You know that's
pretty much the story of Gulf Pride HD. Gulf's amazing new high detergency motor oil.
Ever since Gulf Pride HD was introduced last spring Americans more and more of them have tried it
and stayed with it because Gulf Pride HD has proved it can do exactly what it says it can do.
Keep your engine remarkably clean under all driving conditions.
Yes Gulf Pride HD will keep your engine clean no matter what kind of driving you do on long
vacation trips or during your everyday driving. Those short trips that dirty up an engine worse than
any other kind of driving. Now when your engine gets dirty it can cause trouble and result in
expensive repair bills. Piston rings get gummy hydraulic valve lifters stick and you may use more oil.
But when there's Gulf Pride HD in your crankcase your engine stays clean and runs better.
So friends on long trips or short trips keep Gulf Pride HD in your crankcase and keep your engine clean.
Stop at the sign of the Gulf Orange Disc and ask for Gulf Pride HD. You can't buy a better motor oil.
It's the finest in the field.
And here's Frank Blair again. Thank you. Before Senator Estes Kiefov or any other Democrat can get
his party's nomination he's got to think long and hard about the solid stuff. But the
South hasn't been solidly democratic since Harry Truman was nominated and reelected in 1948
in Congress and out of it. Southerners are thinking more and more and are becoming more disturbed
by a Truman spare deal policies. And no issue has created more opposition in the South than the FEPC
which the president strongly endorses. The FEPC is a proposed bill. If it is enacted into law
it would require that anyone seeking employment should be given equal consideration for
opposition regardless of race, color or creed. Employers would not be permitted to discriminate
between applicants of equal ability and experience because of race, color or creed.
In 1948 when the Democratic Convention in Philadelphia officially endorsed the FEPC a group of
Southern delegates electrified the Convention with a dramatic decision.
Without hatred, without anger, without will, but with disillusionment and disappointment
we are faced with the necessity to walk out of this Convention and return to Alabama.
The FEPC is a very important and important part of the FEPC.
During that Hectic-48 Democratic Convention the rebellious delegates from the Southern
States met in caucus to reassure themselves that the Southern bloc stood united in the revolt
against the party. Ladies and gentlemen of the Convention of the South.
I am a Kentuckyan. I'm married a Mississippian.
And the blood that flows through my children is Mississippi and Kentucky blood.
Now you know we've gathered here this afternoon to discuss some serious problems we certainly have.
Now I'm a Democrat I certainly am and being a Democrat I think I've got the right to
little root my own jackass I certainly have. I hear some people say that I'm against Truman but I
can't leave the party. My dear friends let me remind you of this. You're not leaving the party.
The party has already left you. As oh a Southern delegation speaking out of deep and long
held feeling left the Democratic Party went back down south and founded the Dixie Crats in 1948.
Will there be a split in the Democratic Party in 1952? As it faces its toughest competition in 20
years two men could break the party wide open. They are Senator Richard Russell of Georgia and
Senator Estus Kefover of Tennessee. Senator Russell has the traditional Southern attitude toward the
vital FEPC bill and his only visible support is the Southern Democratic machine. Senator Kefover
has been acquiring delegates in the North because he refuses to accept Southern tradition.
For the first time on a television network we bring you the highlights of a free swinging face to
face and cover between these two senators. Filmed especially by the March of Time and exclusive
account of Democratic presidential candidates Kefover and Russell battling over issues which can tear
the South apart.
Well I don't feel as you've made any headway uh you're carrying any space just Senator.
Well I had to do the work I had to hold the water and touch the wood back there in Washington.
Got my good friend who remember my committee wasn't there he was all campaigning over the country
and I someone had to do the work we had to get these bills out of the committee.
Oh let me just say a little word about that.
And as soon as they were sitting. Let me just say a little word about that. I think you'll agree
that since the time I've been on the armed services maybe I've been a pretty faithful member.
I kept a word I just don't know. I kept a word I asked Kefover.
Oh he asked me with that statement.
Well I don't want to embarrass you Senator I don't know.
That's pretty thing in the world but uh well just a minute now let me tell you something.
But I think that anybody who's going to offer themselves for the presidency of the United States
always the duties to go before the people and all the questions of the nation and talk about issues
across the people who've got a right to do the choosing and uh I think that they ought to have more
of a safe zone. I think it's a great educational process. I think it's just as necessary for
candidates to get in prime areas to go before the people for selecting their party nominees as
it is to say uh vote in the general election. We need more democracy so I wouldn't feel right
running for the president unless I took advantage of the various prime areas over the nation and
entered them submitted myself either for the us who know goes one way or the other.
That's what I've done because I think that's what I should do.
Well you carry out your convictions very well and I have no complaint to make about that.
I did not was not able to enter all of these prime areas and uh I do not feel at this and come
but only any candidate to enter the prime areas if he feels he has a very responsible
deal in Washington. I have an idea though that you're not nearly as concerned the
about the prime areas that I didn't add us as you all the more than I did enter here in Florida.
Oh of course I can't say on one that's us giving me some distance.
I'm doing pretty well here at least Senator Russell uh during that time you've been well
Florida during the time you've been in Florida I've been running in two other prime areas
in Ohio and Maryland which I think you should have shared your time between those three like I have.
Well it might have been it might look that way but then you had the badger me you've been
Florida some two or three times before I came down for two days.
Well you've been here before and I have been here at 10 campaigning days in all and uh I
feel that uh I was entitled to enter here in Florida if I wait and I know that you will
come to me in here. Oh yeah good idea. Oh I sure I thought it would be.
I wish you'd been in some of the others up in the snow hills of New Hampshire out in these
lizards of well that would have had snow of Maine. And now one thing one of the names for
I mean I'm at eight. Well I'm at the house. I don't have a copy of Maine.
But anyway anyway there are two things I need the one other sensors and uh where I did nothing
and you did nothing. Since the day you're there these are the study new things but I noticed that
86,000 people wrote their names on the dollars for me and I think you got 1,324 up in Massachusetts
where they just uh where they are. You've been all over Pennsylvania and I had never been in there for
having to find Mary. Well you had a you went up there and dedicated a great six something
and the day I saw that. I saw Mary. I think I've spoken there once too but neither I last spoken
but once I think in Massachusetts they had a election up there where uh nobody can list their name
but they have a place. So do you prefer to be president? I got uh just about 30,000 votes and
later to score us all the time that you had 700. Yeah you you had you had your uh work of that all
over the nation and I have not had any and uh you have uh once from prime areas where you didn't
have any opposition. I don't know just how many delegates it's going to get you. With the preliminary
over the debater stops sparring and got down to the record in a wrangle over who voted for what
on federal labor legislation. Better working conditions and they're right of collective
work. So however I know three of you voted against the politics bill and the task partly law.
We had many others. So I want to uh I just looking over the record here wherever I found some
labor thing it seemed like you were voting. Well, layman. Well there's this Conley Act and the
task partly law and uh you named all of that many many others. Well anyway that's three of the
century. Well I'll explain well you voted that you voted against the full employment act that was
uh far as a benefit of labor. Oh no I voted for the full employment. Well it's the records right here
that you voted against the full employment act I can find it. Oh look it up. I don't know what I'm
going to do. Well if you admit it all right but I think we ought to get out of here because that
says very important thing. Oh here it is nine. All right six twenty five forty three.
Oh six nine twenty eight forty five voted against full employment act that passed seventy one
set. And as soon as I'm here about that I did not vote against it. I voted against some of the
amendments. Well there's some of my more liberal colleagues uh we're all right. And they were
in the field. I didn't move against the I really Congress was quarterly I guess. But you didn't get
it either congressional quarter now to make that fair you voted off some type of reason matter
to you that well it's not I didn't. Well there's the thought of there's the taken from our
congressional. Well that's a different thing. Now you're talking about the FEPC you did say on
the floor of the Senate that it was regimentation that it was a doubtful constitutionality and that
it would not work and that any effort to put it in law into operation would cause watch best
difficulties which would be detrimental to the nation. But your quarter didn't associate
press as fat Washington's under star of April 6th 1952 of saying if the Democratic Convention
which nominates me adopts a platform including a compulsory FEPC plank a compulsory that's a
compulsory GFEP plank I shall hold hardly support that platform and it's entirely. So unless you
would greatly miss quartered there you did think it is unconstuse new and regimentation but you
support it is put in the platform. You said a bit of dose that you will swallow if you have to.
All right I'll say that I say that I'm a Democrat running on the Democratic Party I'm going to do
my best to see that we've got the thing worked out but I'm not going to pick up my marbles and run
out of the party if we don't. Well I've been a Democrat for some time myself and I can
think that you're good at that legislation that over the past 20 years I've been the author of
a good deal of it and I've supported their most of it but when you come to something it my mind is
completeness socialistic they are all the line I've been living with the party before you would
all know that's another one of these Indian endos you've been cast well out of it isn't here I
never let here direct that so you would have one that was in you and those know I'm not going to
leave the party I didn't leave the 1948 and put it in the platform I put it on the floor the
Senate and kept kill it there and I led the fight against it and I'm going out it's when I'm
nominated president I don't think they'll have it in the platform but they do I'm going to
put it in the battle lines were sharply drawn Senator Keepover was sticking his head into a beehive
of all line southern politicians including Florida's governor full of war and
whole congressional delegation to senators here have ganged up on me to try to stop me down here
for the administration tried to stop me and you have sure and Nebraska and now they've
really got a gang up down here I've never seen anything like it in my life governor's it's
through senators they all the congressman now would you just I don't know if they supported you
and of course all of the you just about and of course all of our all of our people we made mad
with the crime committing down here the recorders and gangsters they will joy then trying to
give me the work to so I've got to write this off back into they must back and be well you might
name them I don't know any of them you've apparently claimed willing to you'll work on the committee I
don't know any uh right here's a gangsters here and of course you've been very effective in this
four little s's attitude everybody's picking on him four little fellows they're all to get along
but you've done very well by yourself yes Senator Keepover did all right in the Florida primary
he made it close even though he lost and did you catch the significance of Senator Russell's
statement concerning the FEPC I'd like to repeat what Senator Russell has just said about the FEPC
plan and I quote when I'm nominated for president I do not think they will have it in the platform
if they do I'm going to repudiate repudiate it will the democrats nominate the man and Chicago who
has announced that he will repudiate the party platform and if Senator Keepover is nominated will
he be repudiated by the south for the Tennessee senators answer to this vital question and others
we'll take you in just a moment to keepover headquarters at the Raleigh Hotel in Washington
but right now Bill Rogers has a word for the women well it's a little too early for the experts
to make any political predictions everything's so topsy-turvy that reminds me everything's
kind of topsy-turvy for the housewives too only they call it spring cleaning and that covers
everything from clearing out the seller to a moth-proofing woolen's well ladies the seller is
strictly up to you but I can offer you a few pointers on protection against moths first of all
start outright with track gulf's effective safe moth killer that won't shrink or stain color fast
woolen's yet protects them straight through the summer just follow the directions on the label
and spray track on your winter willens before you store them and don't forget to spray track on
your will and drapes and on the carpets especially where they aren't walked on tomorrow ask for
track at your favorite store or at your good gulf dealers the usual price is 65 cents a quart
don't let the low cost fool you you can't buy a finer moth killer than gulf track
t-r-a-k good for clothes bad for moths and all let's go to keepover headquarters and Frank Bergholzer
this is the national headquarters of senator estus kieffover a democratic senator and presidential
candidate from chattanooga tenisee we're on the second floor of the rolly hotel in Washington dc
on pence elvania avenue the street that runs from the capital to the white house and we're a
little closer as a matter of fact to the white house than we are to the capital there 28 paid
full-time workers here at kieffover headquarters a pool of some 250 volunteers like our receptionist
the suite here at the rolly has offices for the speakers bureau women's division all kinds of
workers offices except strangely enough an office for senator kieffover himself whose office is in
the senate office building among the most important of these offices is the press room chief
publicist bill hard in his staff put out the campaign literature the press releases keep up
with election returns like tonight for example the returns will be coming in from origan the
primary out there in origan the press room is a very active place on nights like tonight it runs
24 hours a day there are momentos of the campaign on the wall coonskin cap there's a portrait of
senator kieffover and several other presidents there's a typical campaign poster and a typical
newspaper ad that's when ran in a newspaper in tenisee but let's meet some of the people here in
the press room here's Hank loose Washington time life correspondent this is nancy kieffover the
senator's charming wife senator estes kieffover himself and frank bignotin the veteran life
Washington correspondent well welcome to the kieffover headquarters we the people and i'm
glad to have you here frank bignotin and hank loose of life magazine you see we have a very busy
place here in our headquarters well senator kieffover nancy it's good to be here with you folks
this evening it's such a rare occasion when we can catch you here i wonder how far do you think you
traveled on this campaign center oh gee i haven't figured out yet frank but i imagine it's been more
than a hundred thousand miles and you've been with us a whole lot of the time so you would know but
we've been across the continent i think four times is that right mancy i think it must be about that
least you have and it's been a very pleasant trip to frank i just came back just to have the
opportunity of being with you and hank from san francisco this morning is a matter of fact i was
afraid for a while that you wouldn't get in but uh... now senator i've got some questions if we
want to ask you to clarify a few political issues and i'd like to ask you why it is senator kieffover
that most of the democratic leaders are a lot of the democratic leaders and southern senators
and some of the big city politicians are are lining up against you well frank i don't think
that it's fair to say that all of them are lining up against me i do have a lot of political support
from some of our good democratic political leaders and i'm happy to say that more and more of them
are coming to my support particularly when they see the way the people are voting and the way
the people seem to feel but uh... i don't know i think we're in for a time when the people are
going to have more of a say so about what's going to happen in our political parties when
the nominees of our parties will be selected more by the people than by the political leaders
i support some of them know that i'm not going to be dictated to that i'm going to do the thing
that i think is right if i'm elected president of the united states i wish you'd repeat that you
said you would not be dictated to that's right well i i think we're always led to listen and to be
counseled with but i think the first consideration must be the average man and woman of america
and not just the political leaders do you think senator that there's any fear that you won't play
the old style political game with some of the the political bosses well uh certainly i think there
is a great deal of fear and there must be some basis for justification for the fear that i'm not
going to play the old time political game but i'm going to make it very clear that i believe in
organized in political organizations i think we have to have organizations that reflect the
viewpoint and the will of the people and i think that we need to bring our the voice of our people
to be felt more in our political organization so i'm not against political organizations as such
i think they ought to be the instrumentality of the members of our political parties
rather than having party organizations dictate to the people what they should do
so i'm the keeper yeah hangis good see you again you put on a very strong race in the
florida and yet you didn't quite uh win out and i wanted if you had any particular explanation for that
well hangiably frank with you i did a great deal better than i ever anticipated i would
when we went into florida it was predicted that we would lose three or four to one
if uh florida is of course adjacent to the state of jorge where i might distinguish the
opponent there who is a very capable and find man lives the brave men of jorge and live in florida
and of course i had the combined political opposition of senator holland and
senator smathers governor fuller war and all of the eight congressmen together with about
nine tens of the chairman of the democratic committees in the state of florida then i ran on
national issues and not sectional issues and i think expected i got 44% of the vote was a great
thing for me it was much better than i ever expected to do and i think in the uh delegate contest that
i will a several of the delegates who are pledged to me will be elected well senator do you know
about how many delegates you have pledged to you and all right now all you mean all over the nation
i think and the primary is that i've won about 115 delegates and i think that uh in convention
states and in other places that i know of about two hundred and fifteen who have indicated that
they're farmy as of now we're gaining every day though i'd like to get back to this matter of
political support for just a minute frank you can get back to anything you want to buddy i have
thank you i have a special message here that was sent to be read on this program i hope it's a
good one for us that this year has never before the people want the candidate for president to be a
man of their own choosing not one imposed upon them by political organizations senator key fover
has demonstrated by his work as a congressman as a senator that is a true liberal in the sense
of franklin d rosevalt tradition and that he will fight for honesty and government even when it
means treading on toes of powerful persons in his own political part i think that's been demonstrated
we and the democratic party want to win or this fall of all the candidates of our party now
contending for the nomination senator key fover has the best chance of leading us to a victory in
November that was a special message sent to you by mayor joseph s clerk of philadelphia and
richard and ill worth the desperate attorney out there oh gee i do appreciate that message they
are outstanding members of the democratic party that's the kind of new life and new attitude that we
are having in our democratic party throughout the nation and jote larc and richard and ill worth
i think or two of the and especially i'm convinced that it's true that they are a very outstanding
american citizens and view of this wonderful message i've known both of them a long time and that's
kind of new personality that we want to have in the democratic party and this message certainly
comes as a very pleasant surprise to me and i have one other little surprise for you senator and that is
i wondered if you'd had any election returns for moron no i haven't i spent about two days out
there and i found that there was an effort to keep the vote down and also to build up some vote
for governor stevensson so i had some worry about the outcome and i certainly would be glad to have
some message about it right well i think i can give you a report right now we had to call just a
few minutes ago from our correspondent and the important dean brawis and the state is is he the
life correspondent that's right what he must be accurate to him he made spot checks over the entire state
and the latest report was that you would win upward of 60 percent of the preferential vote
oh that's what we own well delicate oh that's wonderful that's right see nicely i will i
did out there great deal of this uh campaign success i think uh and goes to you and uh you've
been made a lot of political speeches on behalf of your husband uh one of you can uh think of
which feature you thought was your best well i did scarcely called them political speeches honestly
i'm only just been tentiating occasionally when he wasn't able to be there and i i know none of them
were best i think that isn't true but and i see almost shoots me every time he has to make a speech
but sometimes our engagements we can't make them all so she goes and pinch hit his tense pits and
really makes a wonderful speech too how do you know you've never heard well i heard about it though
but what are the issues that you must like to talk about well the first main issue is my husband
perhaps is something good about him gentlemen and this is people where i'm sir and direct we have a very
special guest standing by in life magazine famous room 22 and this guest incident he has a message
of special interest to you the senator keyfover so we take you now to room 22 the honorable Paul
Douglas the distinguished senator from Illinois oh i do sure what i'm glad to be here i'm for
the senator esti's keyfover for president and i'm for him to the finish there has been a stop
keyfover movement in new hampshire in nebraska in florida and many other states the administration
has had a hand in this campaign against my friend the politicians are against it but the people
are for him i am for son of the keyfover because he would not let friendship and fix the trade
i am for him because i know as certainly as i sit here that he would clear out the chisels and
fixes who hang around the washington hotels and who hang onto the coattails of a great party he
is the candidate of the people and he is for the people i am for him because i believe of all
democrats he is the best man to be any republican including generalize in how i think he will win
the nomination and that he will be elected
in order to bring you complete an unbiased coverage of vital issues of why general interest
at this time no attempt has been made to influence or censor the statements of any individuals
appearing on this program the opinions expressed or not necessarily those of the sponsor